Release v0.57.0 (#4511)
grafana/k6: release notes/v0.57.0.md

k6 `v0.57.0` is here 🎉! This release includes:

- Introducing helpers for functional testing.
- The `k6 new` command now supports templates and ProjectIDs.
- The `k6/experimental/csv` module gets a new `asObjects` option.

> - We no longer support the `k6/experimental/browser` module.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- We no longer support the `k6/experimental/browser` module, in favor of `k6/browser`.
```

I think reading this without mentioning the graduated module feels a little bit weird, like we're dropping browser support. What do you think of this suggestion? 🤔

- Moving all non-public APIs to the `internal` package.

## Breaking changes

- [#4161](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4161) Drops `k6/experimental/browser`. If you are still using it, please follow the [instructions](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/using-k6-browser/migrating-to-k6-v0-52/) to move to the not experimental module.

> - [#4133](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4133) Moves all not publicly used API in `internal` package. This was based on the publicly available extensions for k6. And may break private ones. There is a good chance more APIs will be removed or changed in follow-up releases after this more mechanical change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#4133](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4133) Moves all not publicly used APIs in `internal` package. This was based on the publicly available extensions for k6 and may break private ones. More APIs will likely be removed or updated in follow-up releases after this more mechanical change.
```

> - [#4292](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4292) TypeScript is automatically supported and recognized if the script files use the `.ts` extension. Consequentially, it deprecates `experimental_enhanced` compatibility-mode as it is no longer necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#4292](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4292) TypeScript is automatically supported and recognized if the script files use the `.ts` extension. It also deprecates `experimental_enhanced` compatibility mode as it is no longer necessary.
```

## New features

### New functional testing focused official jslib [k6-testing](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-testing)

The k6 team has been developing a new official jslib dedicated to functional testing. While it is still under active development and will potentially see breaking changes, the set of APIs and behaviors it offers are meant to make their way into k6 eventually, and it is now available for early feedback.

[k6-testing](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-testing) is a k6 javascript library that offers a seamless way to write functional tests in k6, using a Playwright-compatible assertions API. It exposes an `expect` function, with which assertions can be performed using specific matchers that reflect the expectation.

> When assertions fail, the test will immediately fail with a clear error message, including the expected and actual values in a similar fashion to what users would observe when using Playwright assertions. 

Reviewer 2: I feel that it's worth mentioning something like
```suggestion
Unlike current k6's `check` when `expects` assertions fail, the test will immediately fail with a clear error message, including the expected and actual values in a similar fashion to what users would observe when using Playwright assertions. 
```

Also, it could be something relevant to mention on https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/k6/check/

Reviewer 3: I would prefer if we do not relate k6-testing to other primitives, yet. The reason for it being that key features are still missing, and we're figuring out how to integrate it better in the ecosystem (cloud, synthetics, etc) down the road 👍🏻

> There are many generic matchers (and more to come), such as `toEqual`, `toBe`, or `toBeTruthy`, to only name a few, that can be used to assert conditions during a k6 test.

Reviewer 2: It's worth pointing to the documentation, e.g. this GitHub README or a better place

```suggestion
[There are many generic matchers](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-testing?tab=readme-ov-file#3-standard-assertions) (and more to come), such as `toEqual`, `toBe`, or `toBeTruthy`, to only name a few, that can be used to assert conditions during a k6 test.
```

import { browser } from "k6/browser";

export const options = {
  scenarios: {
    ui: {
      executor: "shared-iterations",
      options: {
        browser: {
          type: "chromium",
        },
      },
    },
  },
};

export default async function () {
  const page = await browser.newPage();

  try {
    // Navigate to the page
    await page.goto("https://test.k6.io/my_messages.php");

    // Type into the login input field: 'testlogin'
    const loc = await page.locator('input[name="login"]');
    await loc.type("testlogin");

    // Assert that the login input field is visible
    await expect(page.locator('input[name="login"]')).toBeVisible();

    // Expecting this to fail as we have typed 'testlogin' into the input instead of 'foo'
    await expect(page.locator('input[name="login"]')).toHaveValue("foo");
  } finally {
    await page.close();
  }
}
```

It is currently available as part of the [jslib.k6.io](https://jslib.k6.io) repository and is available to use in your k6 tests by adding the following import:

```javascript
import { expect } from "https://jslib.k6.io/k6-testing/0.2.0/index.js";
```

> Try it out and give us feedback or contribute to the project on the [k6-jslib-testing repository](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-testing)!

Reviewer: Maybe a question for the team, do we want to include a mention of this new library in the [jslib docs](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/jslib/) page, or do we want to wait for some user feedback/more development before doing so?

Reviewer 3: I've been 😷 and unable to get to it, but I will add documentation for the jslib indeed. This should not be a blocker for the release though 🙇🏻

Reviewer: Thanks @oleiade 🙇 . I've created an issue for it here: https://github.com/grafana/k6-docs/issues/1869.

### `--template` and `--project-id` flags for `k6 new` command [#4153](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4153)

> This command has been revamped to provide an improved experience when scaffolding new k6 tests. It now supports a `--template` flag with options such as `minimal`, `protocol`, and `browser`—letting you generate a script tailored to your specific use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `k6 new` command has been revamped to provide an improved experience when scaffolding new k6 tests. It now supports a `--template` flag with options such as `minimal`, `protocol`, and `browser`, letting you generate a script tailored to your specific use case.
```

The command also now accepts a `--project-id` flag, which allows you to easily parameterize the test's Grafana Cloud configuration.

```sh
# Create a new k6 script using the 'protocol' template
$ k6 new --template protocol

> # Create a cloud-ready script with a specific project ID

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Create a grafana k6 cloud-ready script with a specific project ID
```

$ k6 new --project-id 12345
```

## UX improvements and enhancements

### New `asObjects` option in `k6/experimental/csv` module [#4295](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4295)

The CSV module's parsing operations now support the `asObjects` option, which enables parsing CSV data into JavaScript objects instead of arrays of strings (the default behavior).

> When `asObjects` is set to `true`, the module parses CSV data into objects where:
> - Column names from the header row become object keys
> - Column values become the corresponding object values
> - An error is thrown if no header row exists or if options modify the parsing start point

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `asObjects` is set to `true`, the module parses CSV data into objects where:

- Column names from the header row become object keys.
- Column values become the corresponding object values.
- An error is thrown if no header row exists or if options modify the parsing start point.
```

With the option set to `true`, 

```js
import http from 'k6/http';
import csv from 'k6/experimental/csv';

const csvData = csv.parse('data.csv', { asObjects: true });
```

the following CSV file:

```csv
name,age,city
John,30,New York
Jane,25,Los Angeles
```

will be parsed into the following JavaScript objects:

```js
[
  { name: 'John', age: '30', city: 'New York' },
  { name: 'Jane', age: '25', city: 'Los Angeles' },
]
```

> See the [csv module's documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/k6-experimental/csv/) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the [CSV module's documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/k6-experimental/csv/) for more information.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: I feel like a header here is missing, or at least we need a separator between the CSV new feature and the list.

Author: I feel like the same. Any suggestion? Something like?

```markdown
See the [csv module's documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/k6-experimental/csv/) for more information.

### Additional UX improvements and enhancements

- [#4176](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4176) Warns on using shorthand options when that override scenarios.
...
```

Or, put these PRs (4176 etc.) before the `asObjects` PR?

Reviewer 2: I believe we could just move `## UX improvements and enhancements`, keeping the `### New `asObjects` option in ... ` under the `## New features` header

Reviewer 3: Will move the `asObjects` under the new features section as suggested 👍🏻

- [#4176](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4176) Warns on using shorthand options when that override scenarios.
- [#4293](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4293) Renames browser data directory name prefix from `xk6-browser-data-` to `k6browser-data-`.

> - [#4513](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4513) Adds support for `file` scheme URLs across file loading APIs - `open`, `k6/experimental/fs.open` and `k6/net/grpc.Client#load`.

Reviewer: Should we include examples for these in the docs?

Reviewer 3: I think this is not necessarily necessary 🙇‍♂️

- [#4517](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4517) Switches from the legacy examples to quickpizza.grafana.com.

## Bug fixes

- [#4174](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4174) Fixes an NPD during a click, which could occur when either the load generator or chrome instance is under a lot of load.
- [#4192](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4192) Fixes a memory leak in general event handling between components.
- [#4280](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4280) Fixes an NPD by not disposing of the original handle.
- [#4288](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4288) Cleans up browser download path artifacts after a test run.

## Maintenance and internal improvements

- [#4184](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4184) Fixes some browser Windows tests.

> - [#4131](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4131) Moves experimental websocket code withing k6 codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#4131](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4131) Moves experimental WebSocket code into the k6 codebase.
```

- [#4143](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4143) Fixes for k6packager workflow building image to do k6 releases.

> - [#4172](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4172) Drops slack URL from the README.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#4172](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4172) Drops Slack URL from the README.
```

- [#4173](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4173) Updates dependencies in gRPC example server.

> - [#4187](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4187) Removes packaging folder from browser module - not needed after it was moved to k6 codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#4187](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4187) Removes packaging folder from browser module - not needed after it was moved to the k6 codebase.
```

> - [#4188](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4188), [#4190](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4190) Merge xk6-webcrypto extension code into the k6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#4188](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4188), [#4190](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4190) Merge xk6-webcrypto extension code into k6.
```

- [#4189](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4189) Uses `modulestest` to make experimental streams test simpler.
- [#4191](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4191) Removes BaseEventEmitter from components that don't work with it.

> - [#4201](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4201) Adds more dependencies to dependabot.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [#4201](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4201) Tracks more dependencies to dependabot.
```

> - [#4212](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4212) Fixes grpc tests after update to golang internal test certificates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [#4212](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4212) Fixes gRPC tests after update to golang internal test certificates.
```

k6 `v0.57.0` is here 🎉! This release includes:

- Introducing helpers for functional testing.
- The `k6 new` command now supports templates and ProjectIDs.
- The `k6/experimental/csv` module gets a new `asObjects` option.
- We no longer support the `k6/experimental/browser` module, in favor of `k6/browser`.

> - Moving all non-public APIs to the `internal` package.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Moving most of non-public APIs to the `internal` package.
```

k6 `v0.57.0` is here 🎉! This release includes:

- Introducing helpers for functional testing.
- The `k6/experimental/csv` module gets a new `asObjects` option.
- We no longer support the `k6/experimental/browser` module.
- Moving all non-public APIs to the `internal` package.

> - Many other improvements, bug fixes, and internal refactors.

Reviewer 4: This sounds useless, we are highlighting things here.

Author: Removed.

- (_optional_) `<highlight of breaking changes>`

> - `<Summary of new features>` (_one or multiple bullets_)

Reviewer 4: Reminder

Author: Removed. No more highlights.

## Breaking changes

> - [#4161](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4161) Drops `k6/experimental/browser`. If you are still using it, please follow the [instructions](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/using-k6-browser/migrating-to-k6-v0-52/) to move to the not experimental module.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [#4161](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4161) Drops `k6/experimental/browser`. If you are still using it, please follow the [instructions](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/using-k6-browser/migrating-to-k6-v0-52/) to move to the graduated and stable `k6/browser` module.
```

Reviewer: @codebien suggestion is great 👍 . Two small nits, I would also replace "you are" with "you're" and remove "please".

Author: ```suggestion
- [#4161](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4161) Drops `k6/experimental/browser`. If you're still using it, follow the [instructions](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/using-k6-browser/migrating-to-k6-v0-52/) to move to the graduated and stable `k6/browser` module.
```

- [#4133](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4133) Moves all not publicly used API in `internal` package. This was based on the publicly available extensions for k6. And may break private ones. There is a good chance more APIs will be removed or changed in follow-up releases after this more mechanical change.
- [#4292](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4292) Makes type stripping on by default and deprecates `experimental_enhanced` compatiblity-mode as it is no longer necessary. This means that now files with `.ts` extension will automatically work with k6.

### (_optional h3_) `<big_breaking_change>` `#pr`

## New features

_optional intro here_

### `<big_feature_1>` `#pr`

> _what, why, and what this means for the user_

Reviewer 4: Reminder

Author: Removed. All features are documented.

### New functional testing focused official jslib [k6-testing](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-testing)

The k6 team has been developing a new official jslib dedicated to functional testing. While it is still under active development and will potentially see breaking changes, the set of APIs and behaviors it offers are meant to make their way into k6 eventually, and it is now available for early feedback.

> [k6-testing](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-testing) is a k6 javascript library that offers a seamless way to write functional tests in k6, using a Playwright-compatible assertions API. It exposes an `expect` function, with which assertions can be performed using specific matchers that reflect the expectation.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
[k6-testing](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-testing) is a k6 JavaScript library that offers a seamless way to write functional tests in k6, using a Playwright-compatible assertions API. It exposes an `expect` function, with which assertions can be performed using specific matchers that reflect the expectation.
```

Reviewer: "expectation" at the end seems a little bit odd to me. What if we replaced it with "expected results"?

Author: ```suggestion
[k6-testing](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-testing) is a k6 JavaScript library that offers a seamless way to write functional tests in k6, using a Playwright-compatible assertions API. It exposes an `expect` function, with which assertions can be performed using specific matchers that reflect the expected results.
```

const csvData = csv.parse('data.csv', { asObjects: true });
```

the following CSV file:

```csv
name,age,city
John,30,New York
Jane,25,Los Angeles
```

will be parsed into the following JavaScript objects:

```js
[
  { name: 'John', age: '30', city: 'New York' },
  { name: 'Jane', age: '25', city: 'Los Angeles' },
]
```

See the [csv module's documentation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/javascript-api/k6-experimental/csv/) for more information.

- [#4176](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4176) Warns on using shorthand options when that override scenarios.
- [#4293](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4293) Renames browser data directory name prefix from `xk6-browser-data-` to `k6browser-data-`.
- [#4513](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4513) Adds support for `file` scheme URLs across file loading APIs - `open`, `k6/experimental/fs.open` and `k6/net/grpc.Client#load`.
- [#4517](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4517) Switches from the legacy examples to quickpizza.grafana.com.

_Format as `<number> <present_verb> <object>. <credit>`_:

- _`#999` Gives terminal output prettier printing. Thanks to `@person` for the help!_
- `#pr` `<description>`

> - `#pr` `<description>`

Reviewer 4: Reminder

Author: Removed. No more PRs.

## Bug fixes

- [#4174](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4174) Fixes an NPD during a click, which could occur when either the load generator or chrome instance is under a lot of load.

> - [#4184](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4184) Fixes some browser Windows tests.

Reviewer 4: It sounds an internal thing

Author: Moved to internal.

> - [#4192](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4192) Fixes a potential memory leak.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [#4192](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4192) Fixes a memory leak when .... on component XYZ.
```
It would be good to give a better insight of where the problem could _potentially_ be.

Author: ```suggestion
- [#4192](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4192) Fixes a memory leak in general event handling between components.
```

- [#4276](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4276) REST API stays on while outputs are flushing, only stopping after that.
- [#4294](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4294) TestStreamLogsToLogger: increase wait time to get less flakiness.
- [#4209](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4209), [#4208](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4208), [#4196](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4196), [#4195](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4195), [#4193](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4193), [#4177](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4177), [#4163](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4163), [#4151](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4151), [#4213](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4213) Update direct dependencies.
- [#4198](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4198) Adds a multiple forward-slash test case. Thanks, @apatruni, for the contribution!
- [#4504](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4504), [#4506](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4506) Update the golangci-lint version.
- [#4298](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4298) Adds test coverage for configuration file's operations.

## _Optional_ Roadmap

> _Discussion of future plans_

Reviewer 4: @joanlopez it would be good to announce the end-of-test summary's changes.

k6 `v0.57.0` is here 🎉! This release includes:

- Introducing helpers for functional testing.
- The `k6 new` command now supports templates and ProjectIDs.
- The `k6/experimental/csv` module gets a new `asObjects` option.
- We no longer support the `k6/experimental/browser` module.
- Moving all non-public APIs to the `internal` package.
- Many other improvements, bug fixes, and internal refactors.
- (_optional_) `<highlight of breaking changes>`
- `<Summary of new features>` (_one or multiple bullets_)

## Breaking changes

- [#4161](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4161) Drops `k6/experimental/browser`. If you are still using it, please follow the [instructions](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/latest/using-k6-browser/migrating-to-k6-v0-52/) to move to the not experimental module.
- [#4133](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4133) Moves all not publicly used API in `internal` package. This was based on the publicly available extensions for k6. And may break private ones. There is a good chance more APIs will be removed or changed in follow-up releases after this more mechanical change.

> - [#4292](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4292) Makes type stripping on by default and deprecates `experimental_enhanced` compatiblity-mode as it is no longer necessary. This means that now files with `.ts` extension will automatically work with k6.

Reviewer 5: Here I guess it is Makes Typescript on by default right?

Author: ```suggestion
- [#4292](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4292) Enables TypeScript support as the default. It also deprecates `experimental_enhanced` compatibility-mode as it is no longer necessary. The files with the `.ts` extension now automatically work with k6.

Reviewer 4: >Enables TypeScript support as the default

the support is enabled by default but it isn't THE default. It is if `.ts` file have been provided.

Author: ?

```suggestion
- [#4292](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4292) Automatically enables TypeScript support for TypeScript files. It also deprecates `experimental_enhanced` compatibility-mode as it is no longer necessary. The files with the `.ts` extension now automatically work with k6.
```

Reviewer 4: What about this one?

```suggestion
- [#4292](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4292) TypeScript is automatically supported and recognized if the script files use the `.ts` extension. Consequentially, it deprecates `experimental_enhanced` compatibility-mode as it is no longer necessary.
```

Author: LGTM.

    ui: {
      executor: "shared-iterations",
      options: {
        browser: {
          type: "chromium",
        },
      },
    },
  },
};

export default async function () {
  const page = await browser.newPage();

  try {
    // Navigate to the page
    await page.goto("https://test.k6.io/my_messages.php");

    // Type into the login input field: 'testlogin'
    const loc = await page.locator('input[name="login"]');
    await loc.type("testlogin");

    // Assert that the login input field is visible
    await expect(page.locator('input[name="login"]')).toBeVisible();

    // Expecting this to fail as we have typed 'testlogin' into the input instead of 'foo'
    await expect(page.locator('input[name="login"]')).toHaveValue("foo");
  } finally {
    await page.close();
  }
}
```

It is currently available as part of the [jslib.k6.io](https://jslib.k6.io) repository and is available to use in your k6 tests by adding the following import:

```javascript
import { expect } from "https://jslib.k6.io/k6-testing/0.2.0/index.js";
```

Try it out and give us feedback or contribute to the project on the [k6-jslib-testing repository](https://github.com/grafana/k6-jslib-testing)!

> ### Refactor of the `k6 new` command [#4153](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4153)

Reviewer 6: I have added this section. 

First time writing release notes... so let me know your thoughts 😄

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### `--template` and `--project-id` flags for `k6 new` command [#4153](https://github.com/grafana/k6/pull/4153)
```
@dgzlopes What about a more specific title instead of a generic _refactor_?

Reviewer 6: Yup, much better!
